Add indexing chapter (#1223)
plone/documentation: docs/backend/indexing.md

```python
from plone.app.dexterity.behaviors.metadata import ICategorization
from plone.app.dexterity.textindexer import utils

utils.searchable(ICategorization, 'categorization')
```

The `title` and `description` on `plone.app.dexterity`'s `IBasic` behavior are marked as searchable by default.
For marking them as no longer searchable, there is a utility function:

```python
from plone.app.dexterity.behaviors.metadata import IBasic
from plone.app.dexterity.textindexer import utils

utils.no_longer_searchable(IBasic, 'title')
```

Alternatively, if you specified your model as a plone.supermodel XML model,
you can mark the field searchable by using `indexer:searchable="true"`:

```xml

<model xmlns="http://namespaces.plone.org/supermodel/schema"
        xmlns:indexer="http://namespaces.plone.org/supermodel/indexer">
    <schema based-on="plone.supermodel.model.Schema">

        <field name="specialfield" type="zope.schema.TextLine"
                indexer:searchable="true">
        <title>Special field</title>
        </field>

    </schema>
</model>
```

Your SearchableText indexer includes now your custom field on your behavior. 

> It is enabled on your content type, if the `plone.textindexer` behavior is enabled there too.

Reviewer: The SearchableText indexer includes now your custom field of your behavior. 
The field of your content type is indexed if the `plone.textindexer` behavior is enabled on your content type.

</configure>
```

There is already an adapter for converting files properly. 

#### Extending indexed data

Sometimes you need to extend the SearchableText with additional data which is not stored in a field. 
It is possible to register a named adapter which provides additional data:

```python
from plone.app.dexterity import textindexer
from zope.component import adapter
from zope.interface import implementer

@implementer(textindexer.IDynamicTextIndexExtender)
@adapter(IMyBehavior)
class MySearchableTextExtender(object):

    def __init__(self, context):
        self.context = context

    def __call__(self):
        """Extend the searchable text with a custom string"""
        return 'some more searchable words'
```

ZCML:

```xml
<configure xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope">

    <adapter factory=".indexer.MySearchableTextExtender"
                name="IMyBehavior"
                />

</configure>
```

This is a **named** adapter! This makes it possible to register multiple
extenders for the same object on different behavior interfaces. The name of
the adapter does not matter, but it's recommended to use the name of the

> behavior (this may reduce conflicts).

Reviewer: This is a **named** adapter! 
The named registration allows to register multiple extenders on different behavior interfaces applying to the same object.
The name of the adapter does not matter, but it's recommended to use the name of the behavior (this may reduce conflicts).

---
html_meta:
  "description": "Using Plone's catalog to index content and make it searchable."
  "property=og:description": "Using Plone's catalog to index content and make it searchable."
  "property=og:title": "Indexing"
  "keywords": "indexing, indexes, indexer, catalog, searching, FieldIndex, SearchableText, textindexer"
---

(backend-indexing-label)=

# Indexing

To make Plone content searchable, one can use different indexes to index content.

The most important index types are:

- `FieldIndex`
- `KeywordIndex`
- `DateIndex`
- `DateRangeindex`
- `BooleanIndex`
- `ZCTextIndex`

The most important indexes are:

## `SearchableText`

The `SearchableText` is a `ZCTextIndex` for indexing full text and is used by default for `Dublin core` fields like Title, Description and Text.

### TextIndexer

To add other fields to the `SearchableText`, one can use the `plone.app.dexterity.textindexer`.

> For enabling the indexer just add the behavior to the list of behaviors of your
> content types.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For enabling the indexer just add the behavior to the list of behaviors of your content types.
```

In your *profiles/default/types/YOURTYPE.xml* add the behavior::

    <?xml version="1.0"?>
    <object name="example.conference.presenter" meta_type="Dexterity FTI"
       xmlns:i18n="http://xml.zope.org/namespaces/i18n"
       i18n:domain="example.conference">

     <!-- enabled behaviors -->
     <property name="behaviors" purge="false">
         <element value="plone.textindexer" />
     </property>

    </object>

Now you need to mark the fields you want to have in your SearchableText. This

> can be done with the searchable directive:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now you need to mark the fields you want to have in your SearchableText. 
This  can be done with the searchable directive:
```

```python
from plone.app.dexterity import textindexer
from plone.supermodel.model import Schema
from plone import schema

class IMyBehavior(Schema):

    textindexer.searchable('specialfield')
    specialfield = schema.Text(title=u'Special field')

```

> If you want to mark fields of an existing 3rd party behavior, it can be
> done using this utility function:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to mark fields of an existing 3rd party behavior, it can be done using this utility function:
```

```python
from plone.app.dexterity.behaviors.metadata import ICategorization
from plone.app.dexterity.textindexer import utils

utils.searchable(ICategorization, 'categorization')
```

The `title` and `description` on `plone.app.dexterity`'s `IBasic` behavior

> are marked as searchable by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `title` and `description` on `plone.app.dexterity`'s `IBasic` behavior are marked as searchable by default.
```

For marking them as no longer searchable, there is a utility function:

```python
from plone.app.dexterity.behaviors.metadata import IBasic
from plone.app.dexterity.textindexer import utils

utils.no_longer_searchable(IBasic, 'title')
```

Alternatively, if you specified your model as a plone.supermodel XML model,
you can mark the field searchable by using `indexer:searchable="true"`:

```xml

<model xmlns="http://namespaces.plone.org/supermodel/schema"
        xmlns:indexer="http://namespaces.plone.org/supermodel/indexer">
    <schema based-on="plone.supermodel.model.Schema">

        <field name="specialfield" type="zope.schema.TextLine"
                indexer:searchable="true">
        <title>Special field</title>
        </field>

    </schema>
</model>
```

> Your SearchableText indexer includes now your custom field on your behavior, as
> soon you enable it in your content type, where `IDexterityTextIndexer` behavior
> is enabled too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Your SearchableText indexer includes now your custom field on your behavior. 
It is enabled on your content type, if the `plone.textindexer` behavior is enabled there too.
```

#### Registering a custom field converter

> By default, a field is converted to a searchable text by rendering the widget
> in display mode and transforming the result to text/plain. However, if you need
> to convert your custom field in a different way, you only have to provide a
> more specific converter multi-adapter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, a field is converted to a searchable text by rendering the widget in display mode and transforming the result to `text/plain`. 
However, if you need to convert your custom field in a different way, you only have to provide a more specific converter multi-adapter.
```

Convert multi-adapter specification:

:Interface: `plone.app.dexterity.textindexer.IDexterityTextIndexFieldConverter`
:Discriminators: context, field, widget

Example:

```python
from plone.app.dexterity.textindexer.converters import DefaultDexterityTextIndexFieldConverter
from plone.app.dexterity.textindexer.interfaces import IDexterityTextIndexFieldConverter
from my.package.interfaces import IMyFancyField
from plone.dexterity.interfaces import IDexterityContent
from z3c.form.interfaces import IWidget

> from zope.component import adapts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from zope.component import adapter
```

from zope.interface import implementer

@implementer(IDexterityTextIndexFieldConverter)

> class CustomFieldConverter(DefaultDexterityTextIndexFieldConverter):
>     adapts(IDexterityContent, IMyFancyField, IWidget)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@adapter(IDexterityContent, IMyFancyField, IWidget)
class CustomFieldConverter(DefaultDexterityTextIndexFieldConverter):
```

> class CustomFieldConverter(DefaultDexterityTextIndexFieldConverter):
>     adapts(IDexterityContent, IMyFancyField, IWidget)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@adapter(IDexterityContent, IMyFancyField, IWidget)
class CustomFieldConverter(DefaultDexterityTextIndexFieldConverter):
```

    def convert(self):
            # implement your custom converter
            # which returns a string at the end
            return ''
```

ZCML:

```xml
<configure xmlns="http://namespaces.zope.org/zope">

    <adapter factory=".converters.CustomFieldConverter" />

</configure>
```

> There is already an adapter for converting NamedFiles properly. It's registered
> only if `plone.namedfile` is installed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is already an adapter for converting files properly. 
```

#### Extending indexed data

> Sometimes you need to extend the SearchableText with additional data which is
> not stored in a field. It's possible to register a named adapter which provides
> additional data:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes you need to extend the SearchableText with additional data which is not stored in a field. 
It is possible to register a named adapter which provides additional data:
```

```python
from plone.app.dexterity import textindexer

> from zope.component import adapts

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from zope.component import adapter
```

from zope.interface import implementer

> implementer(textindexer.IDynamicTextIndexExtender)
> 
> 
> class MySearchableTextExtender(object):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@implementer(textindexer.IDynamicTextIndexExtender)
class MySearchableTextExtender(object):
```

> class MySearchableTextExtender(object):
>     adapts(IMyBehavior)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   @adapter(IMyBehavior)
```class MySearchableTextExtender(object):

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
@implementer(textindexer.IDynamicTextIndexExtender)
@adapter(IMyBehavior)
class MySearchableTextExtender(object):

```
